# sasho-nedelkoski-phd-thesis-at-tu-berlin
My PhD thesis obtained from TU Berlin on the topic of "Deep Anomaly Detection in Distributed Software Systems" 


Abstract:

Artificial Intelligence for IT Operations (AIOps) combines big data and machine learning to replace a broad range of IT Operations tasks. The task of anomaly detection has a prominent position in ensuring the required reliability and safe operation in distributed software systems. However, the frequent software and hardware updates, system heterogeneity, and massive amount of data create a challenging environment. The detection of anomalies in these systems predominantly relies on metric, log, and trace data. Each of them provides a different view of the internal states of the systems. By induction, improving the detection in every data source increases the overall anomaly detection performance in the system. This thesis provides the following contributions. (1) We present a method based on variational inference and recurrent neural network to address the detection of anomalies in system metric data that possibly exhibit multiple modes of normal operation. (2) We propose a novel log parsing through language modelling that enables learning of log representations for downstream anomaly detection. We identify the learning of log representations as a major challenge toward a robust anomaly detection. Therefore, we additionally design a method that learns log representations by distinguishing between normal data from the system of interest and easily accessible anomaly samples obtained through the internet. (3) We describe a self-supervised anomaly detection task that utilizes the entire trace information to robustly detect anomalies that propagate through system components. (4) In a rule-based approach, we combine the presented methods for a multi-view anomaly detection. The methods presented in this thesis were implemented in prototypes and evaluated on various datasets including production data from a cloud provider. They provided (1) an F1 score of 0.85 on metric data, (2) parsing accuracy of 99% and F1 score improvement of 0.25 in log anomaly detection, (3) increase in F1 score of 7% in trace anomaly detection over the state of the art, and (4) broadened spectrum of detected anomalies. The results were peer-reviewed and published at renowned international conferences
